About eight years ago,
I met a young woman.
I'll call her Sophia.
And she showed me her newborn in her lap.
And she said to me, "This wasn't my plan."
She described how her unplanned pregnancy
forced her to drop out
of community college,
how she then lost her job
and was now living
with her mother in Texas.
Sophia had already had
two unplanned children
before this third child was born.
All three of Sofia's pregnancies occurred
while she was on the pill.
It was a birth control method
that just didn't work for her,
but it was the only method
she'd ever been offered.
Sophia's pregnancies
weren't just unplanned.
She actively planned
not to become pregnant
and took precautions against it.
But the only method
she was ever offered failed her.
In the US each year,
nearly half of all pregnancies
are unplanned.
I know it's an astonishing number
to get your head around.
And over the span of ten years,
it's been estimated that six out of ten
typical birth-control pill users
will become accidentally pregnant.
This is not just about uninformed teens.
Most unplanned pregnancies occur
to women who are in their 20s.
In fact, about half of all
unplanned pregnancies occur to women
who are actually using
birth control, like Sophia.
Most people know about pills and condoms.
There are actually 18 FDA-approved
methods of birth control,
each with different efficacy
and side effect profiles,
some of which are 20 times
more effective than others.
The reason you don't know
about this is simple.
Outside of specialty family planning
clinics that are few and far between,
health care organizations
don't educate people
about all their birth control options
and don't make them easily available.
But this is what Upstream,
the nonprofit I cofounded, does.
We train community health centers,
hospital practices,
primary care facilities,
the places where the vast majority
of people get their health care,
to put patient centered needs first
and provide best in class
contraceptive care
as a part of basic primary health care.
(Applause)
You know, when I first met Sophia,
I'd been listening for years
to what young people were saying
about the challenges they were facing
achieving their goals.
And I was struck
by how many of their stories
began with some version of,
“Well, I found myself pregnant
and I had to drop out of school.”
Or, “I got my girlfriend pregnant
and I had to quit my job.”
I just kept hearing these stories,
I wasn't looking for it.
And I came away from those
conversations utterly convinced
that lack of equitable access
to contraception,
the inability to get the birth control
method you want, when you want it,
with full information,
was a critical factor
derailing the life trajectories
of many young people in this country.
It's obviously not the only
structural barrier they face, of course,
but I really have come to believe
that it is a major cause of inequality,
and it's one we can actually do
something about.
Back to Sophia.
She told me she faced countless barriers
trying to get another method
of birth control that was more effective.
After hearing from a friend about the IUD,
one of the most effective
methods of birth control,
she decided she wanted that method.
So she ended up getting
a day off from work,
borrowing a car
and driving the three hours
to her health center to get one.
But when she got there,
they told her that they had
to order one for her
and the sole provider they had
who could place that method
was only available on Tuesdays.
They told her to come back
two weeks later.
Even holding down two jobs,
she managed to borrow that car
and make that three-hour journey
and get the day off,
but was told once again
they couldn't place it that day.
They told her to come back a third time,
but this time, she couldn't
get the time off.
Five months later, she did come back,
this time unintentionally pregnant.
Sophia's story demonstrates
how unplanned pregnancy
is rooted in inequitable access
to birth control.
Sophia didn't know that many providers
aren't trained to offer
contraception beyond the pill.
Many health centers don't even stock
the full range of methods,
so it can take multiple
visits and referrals
to get one of the more effective
methods of birth control.
Sophia didn't have the privilege
of that kind of time for birth control,
so she ended up settling
for the only option she had.
Now instead of that experience,
imagine a regular doctor's visit
in primary care like this.
First, no matter why a patient
comes in for care,
they're asked a deceptively simple,
standard screening question.
"Do you plan to become pregnant
in the next year?"
The answer to that question
opens up a whole dialogue
about what they care about
and what they want.
Second, if the answer is no,
patients should be offered the full range
of contraceptive methods
with full information,
so they can really choose the method
that works best for them.
And most importantly,
they should be able to leave that visit
with the birth control method
of their choice,
not be asked to come back
two or three more times.
This is really about shifting the system
of primary care to empower patients.
Well, you don't have to imagine it,
we actually did this.
We trained up the entire
health care system in Delaware
to work this way.
We worked there because patient surveys
showed, when we started,
that more than half
of all pregnancies were unplanned.
Three years later,
the percentage of births
from unplanned pregnancies
dropped 23 percent.
The abortion rate dropped 37 percent,
the largest decline
of any state in the country.
And within six years,
infant mortality dropped 24 percent.
(Cheers and applause)
Upstream is now working in 14 states
with plans to go national.
(Cheers and applause)
It is unconscionable,
unconscionable, that Sophia,
and millions like her in this country,
don't have access
to birth control like this.
Especially in a post-Roe world.
I think we can all agree
that ensuring people have access
to the birth control they need
so they can plan their families
or decide if they want to have one or not,
isn't a blue, red or a purple-state idea.
It's a smart, just, empowering
idea for everyone.
If we care about giving young people
the best start at their dreams,
let's make sure they have access
to fully equitable, fully informed,
patient-centered contraceptive care
as a part of basic primary health care.
We can empower patients like Sophia
with the choices and tools they need
to become the intentional
parents they want to be.
Access to best-in-class health care
and best-in-class contraceptive care
is a health equity issue,
but it is so much more than that.
It's also a foundation
of equal opportunity.
Thank you.
(Cheers and applause)